>> Hello, I'm Chantal Westerman.
One of the best parts
of the wisdom workshops
are the up close and
personal conversations
with the leading
practitioners and authors
in the holistic field.
This gives all of
us an opportunity
to know these people
just a little bit better.
So join me as they share
their wisdom with us.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[GUITAR PLAYING]
>> (SINGING) Time is now.
The moment's clear.
The last shall be the first.
For each one stands
on sacred ground.
May peace prevail upon Earth.
So long in dreams
we have foreseen.
The path for which we thirst.
But now we claim
what was our goal--
may peace prevail on Earth.
The word of love we now claim,
and each one of us with light
that flame.
May peace prevail on Earth.
Now and always prevail on Earth.
And each one of us
prevail on Earth.
May peace prevail on Earth.
>> James, that is so beautiful.
So beautiful.
It's a combination of--
I hear all sorts of
different influences,
and I can't quite
put my finger on it.
It's like chanting that I would
hear in a church a little bit.
I mean, the priests chanting.
It's a little folk.
It's a little country.
What is it?
[LAUGHTER]
>> Oh, it's probably all that.
It's funny because
everything that you mentioned
is sort of my background.
I was in a monastery at one
time, studying to be a priest--
Franciscan-- when
I was like 18, 19.
That was really--
when I was growing up,
my whole frame of reference was
that Catholic, institutional
type path.
>> Yes.
>> But of course, there's
that folkie in me and--
I don't know how much country,
but maybe a little bit.
And--
>> Well, a little
bit in the chords.
A little bit of what
Willie Nelson and Waylon
Jennings used to do.
Just a little bit of that
soulful kind of music.
>> Yeah, well, soulful.
That's a good way
of looking at it.
>> Yeah, yeah.
>> I think soulful is important,
and whether it's quiet
or whether it's loud,
it's got to have soul,
especially when you're
doing this kind of music.
>> And especially when
you're doing the kind of work
you're doing, because I can't
remember a time when the world
has seemed more troubled to me.
Even during war times,
the war was there.
But it feels to me
now as if there's
trouble all over the world.
>> Mm-hm.
>> And your work is traveling
to those places and taking
your music there.
What do you do with your music
in these troubled places?
>> Well first of all, the
interesting thing is I think
what you're saying is true,
and yet at the same time,
we can also say the opposite.
In many other ways,
things have never
been better than
they are right now.
There are more people turning--
opening up themselves,
turning toward each other,
serving, giving
than ever before.
And I think that it's
interesting that both are true.
It's almost like a
rubber band that's
being pulled in two
different directions.
>> Yes.
>> And the tension of a rubber
band is greatest right before
it snaps.
So you've got-- things are worse
than they've ever been before.
Things are better than
they've ever been before.
And it's stretching the
entire thought system.
>> Yes, you're so right because
where there is more pain,
out of that pain
comes awareness.
>> Yes, exactly.
We hear so much about
things like the Y2K problem
and a lot of fear
about what that means.
And you can look at that
in a very fearful way
or you can look at it as one of
these incredible opportunities
that we have to come together
in extraordinary new ways.
And I think that my traveling
around to different places
in the world like Bosnia
or Baghdad or Belfast--
all the B places, it seems--
it's sort of been that for me,
just having the opportunity
to go into places where
violence seems to have won,
and then to demonstrate
that it hasn't
through music, through prayer--
a simple-- just singing.
>> How I am curious--
how did all of
this begin for you?
Because that's
exactly what you do.
You travel to a place of
violence, and your message,
through your music--
through your words--
is not so bad.
There's hope.
How did this begin for you?
>> Well, in 1994, a friend
of mine gave to me a sheet
of paper that had the 12 peace
prayers from the 12 major
religions on it.
And as I began to read each one
of them, a miracle happened.
It was as if I could
hear the music--
as if it was being played in
the next room or something.
And I picked up my guitar
and just began to play along.
And not one of the songs took
more than five or 10 minutes,
and before I knew it,
all 12 peace prayers
had been arranged to music.
And I was soon coined
the peace troubadour
and began traveling around to
different places in the world,
performing these prayers
as a way of showing
that spirituality is
always about peace.
And it was in the summer
of 1995 that I received
my first invitation to
come to a country at war,
and that was in
Bosnia and Croatia.
The war was at its
height at that time,
and I traveled there thinking
that maybe through music
and through prayer, people
could hear the message that they
weren't hearing in other ways,
and that there was another way.
The great thing about
music is that it
slides past those
barriers or those filters
that we use to judge everything.
We hear music
differently, and it just
goes right to our heart.
And so being able to
go and just to pray
and to sing these prayers, I
wondered what kind of impact
it would have.
And I discovered
very quickly that it
had a very powerful impact,
not only on the people
in these countries, but on me.
And of course, that's
really the main thing,
is that I have to-- we all
have to allow ourselves
to become instruments of peace.
And like the guitar,
it can't play itself.
>> No.
>> It's only when it surrenders
and when it allows itself to be
played that it
really is effective.
>> And you paint such a
fascinating picture because we
so often think of government
officials or military men
and women, for that matter,
who lead these countries
as impenetrable, if you will.
But your music must penetrate
the hardest of them.
>> Yes.
When I was in Iraq in February
of 1998, I experienced that--
what you were just saying--
this impenetrable
barrier falling down
in the person of Saddam Hussein.
Someone that-- and it seems that
the whole world is convinced
is this monster, and
certainly, his policies
haven't proven otherwise.
And yet I think being
able to go there at a time
when war seemed imminent
just to pray these prayers
and to sing them at
the National Theater
and to know that he was
watching that concert,
and then to receive a phone call
from one of his secretaries--
actually the Minister
of Information--
who said that Saddam
Hussein himself wanted
me to be called to let me
know that he had actually
stopped to watch this
concert and to pray
with the rest of the world--
all the millions of people
that were praying at that
time for peace in Iraq.
It showed me that ultimately,
we all want the same thing,
regardless of who
we are, whether it's
Saddam Hussein or whoever.
That message-- that
music-- those prayers
can slide past the most
impenetrable suit of armor
and touch the heart.
>> Well it's been said that
a miracle is simply a shift
in perception--
in the way we look at something.
A miracle is just
one little shift.
>> Yes.
>> And by your
telling me that story,
you shifted the perception that
I have and hopefully others
of Saddam Hussein in some
small way because he was moved
by your music.
We would not think of
him as a man who could
be moved by any kind of music.
>> Yeah.
Well, I think one of
the important things
for us today is to be able to
look past all of our judgments
and to realize that regardless
of what the outer picture is
showing us, that behind
that mask is the same face,
whether it be Adolf Hitler or
you and I. That ultimately,
we're all coming from
the same essential place,
and as people who are
trying to live this,
it's our responsibility to be
the ones to look past that mask
and to see that face
of holiness or however
you want to describe that.
And it's by focusing on
that, not on the mask,
that we allow that
to step forward.
And I think that that's what
happened with Saddam Hussein is
I wasn't looking at this
image of Saddam Hussein
that I had in my mind.
I was just going there
to sing prayers of peace.
>> And what is fascinating
is no matter where you are,
no matter how difficult
the situation, somehow,
music is a universal language.
>> Yes.
>> It astonishes me.
Wherever you are, if you start
to sing, people can understand.
>> Yes.
It is.
It is a universal language.
And as we said
before, even if it's
a language we don't understand,
it still touches us.
And one of the reasons for that
is because music is actually
a carrier wave.
We can actually implant or
imprint spiritual vibration
onto music.
That's often what happens when
you hear someone chanting--
say someone who has a very
deep spiritual connection
themselves, and even if the
music is not particularly
professional or
pleasing, something still
connects with us.
Something-- it's like that music
is carrying something that's
deeper than the music itself.
And that's what
connects with us.
Likewise, we can
also hear someone
who has a beautiful voice
or performs beautifully,
but it does not connect
with us in the same way.
That's because it
does not necessarily
have that same vibration
imprinted onto it.
So it's so important for
us to realize that music
is a multidimensional tool.
>> Yes, it is.
It's wonderful.
I'd never thought of
that until you just
said that-- that it is
a spiritual vibration.
>> Yes.
>> Do you see a shift in
people in our country today?
Because I've been
talking all day to people
about the holes in our souls.
>> Yes, I do see a shift.
The funny thing is I
think the reason why
I'm seeing this shift is because
I'm feeling a shift in myself
and--
>> How very interesting, James.
>> You always see that which
is happening within yourself.
If I was not-- if
I was in pain--
if I was in a dark
place, well then
I would probably see
a lot of darkness
and a lot of people
the same way.
But I've discovered that as
I've opened up my own heart
and my own mind, suddenly
I'm finding myself
in contact and touching
and being with people
who are doing the same thing.
When I was in the
mountains of Bosnia in 1995
with the emissaries
of light, which
is what the book, "Emissary
of Light," is based on,
they had like this little
chant that they would say,
and the words were,
seek not peace here,
but find it everywhere.
Seek not peace here,
In other words, don't even
look for peace out here
because it's the surest
way not to find it.
If you're looking for it in
the world or outside yourself--
but if you look for it where it
is, which is inside yourself,
then that's where
the miracle occurs.
Suddenly that same
peace, which we found--
which is the only
place it can be found--
>> Yes.
>> It begins to out-picture.
And suddenly we find
it even in the place
where a moment before, we
couldn't see it at all.
You know, that's
what the miracle is.
You take someone
like Mother Theresa
living in Calcutta--
one of the poorest
cities in the world with
all of the poverty and all
the terrible situations
that they had there.
She would walk down the
street and in a pile of dung,
she would see a flower growing.
>> Yes.
>> And that would
bring her to heaven.
Or you could have
someone in Hawaii--
in a beautiful place--
but if they're not
connected with that place
within themselves that
is joy, that is beauty,
then they're not going
to even see that beauty.
They're going to be in hell.
So that's the key.
Of course people are
shifting, but I'm not going
to see that until I shift.
And that's the key to it.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> How different a man are you?
How have you changed
on a personal level
between the James who
existed before meeting
the emissaries of light--
>> Wow.
>> And the James after he
met the emissaries of light.
How have you shifted?
>> That's a good question.
I think things have become
so much simpler for me.
I realized that this is not
so complicated, after all.
Waking up, enlightenment--
whatever you want to call it.
It's not this
complicated thing--
going to workshops, reading
every book under the sun,
like I thought, perhaps, it was.
I think I began to realize
that this is not something
that we have to do.
It's something that
we have to undo.
And when we allow
that to happen,
the process becomes very simple.
It's this constant stepping back
or surrender into the divine,
and I think for me, that has
been the major shift is--
>> Lovely.
>> Allowing that to happen.
And it's been a
wonderful process
because my life has
become so much brighter.
And I think the
other major thing
that I learned from
the emissaries--
and this is, I think,
really the culmination
of all spiritual practice--
if you want something,
then you have to
give that thing.
If I want peace, then
I have to give peace.
If I want only love, then
I must give only love.
And if we allow that to
be our simple guidepost,
then every moment gives
us a new opportunity
to express what we want--
to give what we want.
>> Yes.
>> Every person like you,
sitting here in front of me
now--
this is my opportunity to be in
heaven simply by seeing heaven
in you.
And when I do that, I suddenly
find myself just irresistibly
pulled into a new reality.
>> Oh yes.
>> Even though this
may not change.
>> Yes.
>> You know?
And yet sometimes, it does.
>> Yes.
>> But I suddenly find myself in
heaven, where a moment before,
perhaps I was in hell just
because I decided that I wanted
that and I gave it.
>> Who are the
emissaries of light?
How did you come upon them?
>> Well I'm actually just
beginning to realize, myself,
who they are.
For a very long
time, I didn't have
an answer to that question.
I just-- it was a very
mysterious thing, even to me.
The short version of the story,
in terms of how I met them,
was while I was in
Croatia and Bosnia
in 1995, I began to
hear these rumors
about this secret society
in the mountains somewhere,
but had no way of
knowing if it was true
or not until I
finally met a man who
claimed to be the
liaison between the world
and this community.
And he said that
this community had
existed for thousands of years.
Not the same people,
of course, but it
was almost like a lineage
of spiritual masters
that would always
be in total secrecy,
doing a very important and
very subtle type of prayer--
a meditation that they
felt would help all of us
to continue this evolution
into this world based
upon the laws of love,
like we said before.
And this person that I
met said that their role
was about to come to an end--
that the community was
about to disband because--
almost as if us,
as an adolescent,
had become an adult. And
when one becomes an adult,
the guardian steps back.
And that is essentially what was
happening with the emissaries.
We're ready now to be
giving this same light--
the same gift that they had been
giving to us-- to each other.
>> Do you have a sense
of why you were picked?
>> Yeah, I do.
It took a while
for me to get it.
At first, when I was there--
or when I got back, really,
it was like, why me?
>> Sure.
>> Who am I?
And then after
about three months
of wandering around, asking
that question, it hit me.
And I think that the reason why
it was me is very important.
The reason why I was the one
brought up into the mountains
to be with these emissaries--
to be given this incredible
message--
is simply because I am no
different than anybody else.
Now that may sound like a
very silly, simple reason,
but the fact is
it's very profound.
Someone that was this
master wasn't drawn up.
Someone who-- a world
leader-- it wasn't someone
like that because so
often, we pick teachers
of people who are
different from us,
like someone from a different
country, different language,
different religion.
It makes it easy for us to
say, well, it's easy for you,
but look how different I am.
Well guess what?
I'm not different
than other people.
I'm very ordinary.
And the fact that
I was the one that
was brought up
there, I believe, was
because this is for all of us.
It has nothing to do with
being extraordinary anymore.
This has to do with each one
of us realizing that even
in my ordinariness,
I'm extraordinary.
>> Yes.
And do you find now that
you have this that projects
are put in front of you?
And do you know what
you have to do next?
What's the next
project that's been
placed in front of James that
says, here's where you go next?
You just show up
and say, present.
>> Yeah, that seems to
be the way it happens.
I certainly can't--
I can't come up with it myself.
The thing that seems
to be happening now
as we approach the dawn
of a new millennium
is we're starting a
project called the Cloth
of Many Colors
Peace Project, where
we're going to be asking
5 million people, which
is about 1/10 of 1% of the whole
population of the planet Earth,
to cut off a piece of cloth
off a piece of clothing,
hold that piece of
cloth, and feel--
like charge it with peace.
And all those cloths--
pieces of cloth-- are
going to be sewn together
into an enormous banner,
that on January 1 of 2000
is going to be wrapped around
the base of the United Nations
building in New York.
And then what we're going
to do with that cloth
is it'll be cut up into
hundreds of prayer shawls,
and I'm going to be
dedicating my year
2000 to traveling
around the world,
presenting these prayer shawls
to the leaders of the world--
a symbol-- more than
a symbol, really.
A tangible, energetic form
representing the prayers
of 1/10 of 1% of the
whole population.
>> And does the United
Nations embrace this idea?
>> Well, the United Nations--
I'm being helped with this
by a nongovernmental agency
at the United Nations.
And so far, it seems
to be going quite well.
>> Because sometimes
they're resistant.
>> Yes.
>> You know, they're
resistant to the idea,
and then at the last
minute, they say, yeah.
OK.
>> Yeah.
Wrapping around the base
may be a tricky thing,
but at the very
least, we can wrap it
around the sidewalk
of the base of the UN.
We'll find a way to do it.
>> Somehow, James, knowing
you in this particular
conversation, as I
say goodbye to you,
I have a sense that it will
be wrapped completely around
the United Nations building.
Would you play us out, as
they say on television?
Pick your favorite prayer.
>> Sure.
To me, this is the
prayer that says it all.
This is the prayer
that began my journey.
It's the prayer
of Saint Francis.
[GUITAR PLAYING]
(SINGING) Oh Lord, make me
an instrument of your peace.
Where there is hatred,
let me bring love.
Oh, divine master, grant
that I may not seek
to be consoled, as to console.
For It is in giving
that we receive.
It is in pardoning
that we are pardoned.
And it is in dying to
ourselves that we live.
Oh Lord, make me an
instrument of your peace.
>> Thank you, James.
>> Thank you.
[MUSIC PLAYING]